# Polygenic_Background_Rare_Variant_Axis

Within the past decade, technological advances in DNA variant detection have illuminated a wide range of genetic architectures underlying complex traits highlighting the role of large-effect (primarily rare) variants and the cumulative impact of individually small-effect common variants (i.e., polygenic risk). Although studies of the genetic basis of complex traits demonstrate a substantial role for polygenic risk as well as large-effect variants, approaches for joint analyses of human genome variation across the entire frequency spectrum are still lacking. Here we investigated the relationship between these two sources of genetic risk among individuals ascertained as cases for multiple defined as “cases” for a range of phenotypes including Tourette Syndrome (TS), obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and type 1 diabetes (T1D). We show that within ascertained case samples (TS, ASD, and T1D) average polygenic burden is significantly lower among cases with putative large-effect variants (either rare or common) in three of the four phenotypes tested. Notably, we did not observe this differential polygenic liability among OCD cases with and without large effect variants. We thus sought to characterize the parameters that most significantly affected power to detect this “inverse axis of risk”. Through simulations, we modeled the effect of varying sample size, population disease prevalence, phenotype heritability, and effect size of the putative large-effect variants. Our results demonstrate how these parameters constrain detection of a relationship between polygenic liability and large-effect variants, including the extent to which polygenic liability influences rare variant penetrance. These findings have implications for clinical use of polygenic scores and may prove broadly useful for the design of future genetic studies across the human disease phenome. 
